In today's lesson, you will learn what
the shell is, how to access it, and
we'll talk a little bit
about the superuser account.
The Shell is the default user
interface to a Linux system.
When you log in to a Linux server over the
network, the Shell is the program that is
started and it acts as your
default interface to the system.
Also, if you're presented with
a text based login prompt,
you'll also be interacting
with a shell by default.
If you login to a graphical user
interface, then you'll need to start
a terminal emulator application
to gain access to the shell.
In CentOS, for example,
you can go to the Applications
menu > System Tools > Terminal.
In Ubuntu, you need to start
a program called The Dash.
To do that, you click on the top icon and
the launcher, which is on the left
hand side of your screen.
It's the icon with the Ubuntu logo on it.
Start typing the word terminal and
you should see the terminal
application pop up, and
you can click on it to start it.
The graphical user interface on
a Linux system is also called a shell.
Its a graphical shell.
However, if someone isn't specific and
they say shell, they're typically talking
about the command line interface.
The shell is really nothing more
than an application or program
that takes the command you feed it, and
it executes those commands for you.
Sometimes, you'll hear the Shell refered
to as a command line interpreter.
The command line interface can be more
powerful than the graphical interface.
For example, if you have several files and
you need to perform the same operation on
those files,
you can often do this easily at the shell.
For example, if you had 100
documents that you needed to rename
you could run a command at
the shell to do all 100 at once.
If you were using the graphical user
interface, you would have to click on
the first file, rename it,
go to the next file and do that 100 times.
In this instance, the command
line is a much better solution.
Another reason you wanna be
familiar with the command line and
be able to use it effectively,
is that it's always going to be there.
Most server additions of Linux
distributions do not include
a graphical interface.
Also, when you're connecting to
a Linux system over the network,
you're typically going to be
connecting via SSH, or secure shell.
This will give you access to
the command line interface as well.
Desktop Linux distributions have
both graphical user interfaces
as well as command line interfaces.
This allows you to have
the best of both worlds.
When it makes sense to use the command
line, use the command line.
When it makes sense to use a graphical
program, use that program.
For example, if I'm working on a Linux
desktop and I want to visit Wikipedia
on the web, I would start a graphical
web browser like Firefox, for instance.
There are command line web
browsers that come with Lennox.
So you can surf the web
from the command line.
Given the choice of using
the command line for web browsing or
a graphical web browser such as Firefox,
I would choose Firefox any day.
When the shell is started,
it displays a prompt or a shell prompt.
The prompt simply just sits there and
stares at you, waiting for
you to do something interesting,
like give it a command to execute.
A shell prompt typically gives you
some sort of useful information.
In this example prompt,
you will see a user name, jason@,
and the name of the Linux system
that you are connected to.
In this case, linuxsvr or Linux server.
At the end of the prompt,
you'll see a dollar sign.
This is an indication that you're using
the system as a normal user as opposed
to a super user.
The superuser shell point ends
typically with a pound sign.
The superuser on a Linux
system is also called root.
It's the root account.
We've previously talked about the root
of the file system or / being root.
This is a different root.
This is an account called root.
So when someone talks about root,
they're either talking about /,
the beginning of the file system or
the superuser account named root.
The root account on a Linux system is
similar to an administrator account
on a Windows system.
Anything that can be done on a Linux
system can be done by the root user.
Normal user accounts can only
do a subset of the things
that the root account can do.
Most of your day-to-day activities will
be performed with a normal user account.
Root access is typically
restricted system administrators.
For example, if you're a working in
a company and you have access to Linux
servers, there will be a team of
people that are responsible for
the upkeep, maintenance, and
configuration of those servers.
And those people
are system administrators.
Sometimes there are not dedicated
people that are system administrators.
For example,
if you're running Linux on your desktop,
you'll have access to a normal
user account and the root account.
You may need root access if you're
going to install an application
that resides outside of
your home directory.
You also may need root access in order
to start or stop that application.
Applications that run as services or
servers typically need
root access to start.
For example, you need root access
in order to start a web server.
However, you don't need special privileges
to start normal applications like
the web browser for instance.
The prompts can vary
greatly in appearance.
Sometimes the are very simple, the are
only one character in length like a $.
Sometimes the contain more
useful information such as
the account your using, the name of
the server that you're connected to, and
the directory that you're currently in.
In couple of these prompts,
you'll notice a tilde.
The tilde is a shorthand way of
representing a home directory.
The tilde used by itself
represents your home directory, or
the current account's home
directory that you're using.
For example, if I'm logged into
a Linux system with a jason account,
~ represents /home/jason.
You can also append a user name to the ~.
And that will expand to that
account's home directory.
For example,
~pat could expand to /home/pat.
Root's home directory is typically n/root,
so ~root = /root.
Not all accounts on a Linux systems
are associated with an individual user.
For example,
services often have their own accounts.
In this case, ~ftp expands to the home
directory of the ftp service account.
Intitalizing /srv/ftp.
So far we've looked at prompts that
are contained within a single line.
Just know that they can span
multiple lines as well.
Later in this course, you'll learn to
customize the shell prompt to your liking.
In summary, the shell is a default
user interface for the Linux system.
You're automatically presented with the
shell prompt if you connect to Linux over
the network using SSH.
If you log into the graphical
user environment,
you can start the terminal application
to gain access to the command line.
Root is a special user on a Linux system.
It's the all powerful superuser.
Your day to day activities will be
performed using your regular user account.